Surprised more people than I thought
would survive till this time on Friday.
Thanks to the Marquis de Sade,
we're here to talk about the
kernel at 3:30 on Friday.
No exciting demos to give.
It's just me, you,
and hopefully we can cover some topics
that you guys are really concerned about.
So, let's get this thing going here.
Where is it?
Oh, there it is.
Okay.
It's over here.
So what are you going to learn today?
Well,
the main thing you're going to learn is
what the basic kernel services are that
are available to you as programmers.
You're also going to learn some
of the layering that goes on above
those services inside of our system.
One of the things that we've been
able to talk about for the last few
years here at WWDC is this really
cool kernel technology we have.
This year part of the message is, yeah,
we have really cool technology.
Don't use it.
So how are you going to use it?
Well, you're going to use the layers
that are built above it.
You're going to mostly be
writing Carbon applications
or Cocoa applications.
Some of you are going to be writing
BSD applications and wrapping them
as you just saw to give them the user
experience of a higher level application.
We want to show you how some of those
services are layered above ours.
What you're going to learn is when
it's safe to directly call some
of our services and when it's not
safe to call some of our services,
what those higher level services are
that are available to you through the
higher frameworks to use those instead.
right?
And one of the key things that this
session is going to teach you is,
although you're not going to be
directly programming to very many
of our services in the kernel,
when it comes time to do debugging,
you're going to have to know
what's happening at those
lower levels of the system,
because the debuggers tend to jump
you in at some of the lowest levels,
and you have to work your way back up.
And so if you don't know how
a thread is tied to some of
the higher level services,
then you're going to be in trouble.
Again, the same thing when you're
trying to tune your application.
You have to understand how
everything is put together,
how the low-level services are used by
the frameworks that you're writing to
in order to get the correct performance
characteristics that you're looking for.
What you're not going to learn here,
we're not going to talk about
how to build file system kecks.
There was another session,
a lot of people come to
the kernel session saying,
great, I'm going to learn all about
how to program in the kernel.
Well, you're going to learn about
the services we provide,
and some of those are available
to kecks writers as well,
but then they're wrapped in a
whole different set of services,
obscuring some of ours,
promoting some of their own.
We're not here to specifically talk
about how to write one of those.
Right, nor are we here to talk about how
to write a network kernel extension.
The networking sessions
covered most of that.
And in general,
we're not here to talk about
how to write in the kernel.
While a lot of this applies,
the same services are
available in the kernel,
again, you're going to tend to be in one
of those specialized environments,
either an IOCit extension or
a file system extension or
potentially a network text.
And when you're in each
of those environments,
the view on these services is different.
You can do some of these things,
you can't do some of these things
that we're going to talk about,
and some of the in-kernel programming
environment access to these services
are spelled a little bit differently
or take a few different parameters.
We're not going to get into those.
All right,
so who would this book be for then,
this session?
And it's for all those people who are
out there writing applications today,
right, that they need to understand.
And the kernel services that it's
using will tell you how to get the
best performance and how to understand
all of that is what we're here for.
Same thing, text developers,
you may learn a little bit,
but you're not going to learn the
details of how to do your work.
And power users, I mean,
when you run some of
the performance tools,
hopefully some of you made it
to the performance section,
performance tool section,
you're going to see a lot of
things going on in the system,
right?
It helps to understand how they're put
together with the lower level services.
Where Darwin is the
lowest level of Mac OS X,
everything that happens in Mac OS X,
to some extent or another, is mitigated,
managed, controlled by the Darwin layer.
And in the Darwin layer, right,
the kernel part is the
most critical part.
Okay, so some of the general truths about
being in a Mac OS X application.
One of the first things that every
application that's a native application
in Mac OS X is a BSD process.
All right,
it's not that some of them are,
some of them aren't.
If you can see them,
if they're an application,
you can see them and manage them
and control them as BSD processes.
And because of the way we
implemented our kernel,
all processes are actually
Mach tasks as well.
So inside of the Darwin Kernel
there's a layering of Mach and BSD.
And so every process is a Mach task.
It owns and controls a Mach task.
One of the things you're also going to
notice and be very tempted by is the fact
that the APIs for all of these different
layers tend to be available everywhere.
If you happen to be writing
Carbon's EFM application,
well, then maybe not everywhere.
But other than that,
you look at the headers and you
look at the frameworks and there's
a lot of APIs available to you.
And one of the things you have to
do is try to stick to the highest
level service that you can for what
programming environment you're in.
Use the services available there.
They tend to map onto
the lower level services.
And if you stick to those,
you're going to be much better off.
What you've seen probably a few
times already today is this picture
of the Darwin Kernel where it talks
about file systems and networking
and the IOCit drivers that are
available and that you can write.
We're not really here to talk
about those bubbles that are there.
We're here to talk about the background.
Everything else.
The services that the kernel provides
that lets those things and all the
applications do what they have to do.
Again, you've traditionally seen this
division of the Mach kernel
versus the BSD part of the kernel.
We tend to think of those as,
while there is a distinction and we
try to keep the formal layering there,
what we're concerned about is the
services that the kernel provides
to you as developers and how to make
those services the best matching
to the semantics of the higher
level applications that we can.
We tend to say, "Well,
we don't have these distinctions.
What we have is one kernel that provides
these services in a layered fashion."
And the basic services
are process management,
threading, scheduler, file management,
not necessarily the file systems itself
but everything that the file systems
use in order to interact with the
rest of the system in managing files,
virtual memory,
inter-process communication and security.
So why don't we start digging
through some of these things.
Oh, wait, first, that's right, I forgot.
Where do all these things come from?
Right.
Well, the kernel is actually a
collection of technologies from
essentially three groups of places.
The Mach 3.0 provides the foundation
for a lot of what goes on in the kernel,
especially virtual memory, scheduling,
and IPC.
The BSD portion,
the main BSD portion of our code,
was picked up from the
4.4 Lights project,
right, and that gives us a process
model of our scheduling,
our file access,
and then we picked up most
of the networking code from
various flavors of free BSD.
Right, so let's dig in and start talking
about process management in Darwin.
At the very fundamental level,
every process is a Mach task and
every application is a process.
At the very lowest level
you have a Mach task.
A Mach task is the unit of resource
ownership as far as Mach is concerned.
Every task owns threads,
it controls them,
it has virtual memory space and
is managed through that Mach task,
and it has a port name space
to collect all the IPC rights
that are usable by that task.
All right, and so traditionally
you can create tasks,
you can spend them, resume them,
and create new threads in them and get
all kinds of information about them.
You can also,
one of the things people tend to do
is create exception handlers for them,
all right,
so that you can catch exceptions that
happen in a task and process those.
And you can also get death notification
and be told when certain tasks
that you have to handle to go away.
Well, that's a nice set of services,
right, but typically you won't be
able to use those directly.
I mean,
you actually can create a Mach task
all by itself in the system,
but you can't manage it, right.
It's just this free-floating
entity that no one else can see,
use, manipulate,
so it's highly discouraged to ever
create a Mach task all by itself,
right.
Instead,
you would tend to create a BSD process,
right,
and you do that through the standard.
BSD APIs, you know, VFork, Exec, right,
create them and destroy them,
and you go ahead and exit.
But the BSD process gives you these
additional resources to go along
with your task besides giving you the
ability to manage them and name them,
right.
They give you the signal handlers,
they give you file descriptors,
they give you a whole
collection of resources.
And what happens is when
you have a BSD process,
right,
and you go look at the BSD process,
you can see that there's a
lot of resources that you
can use to manage them.
So you can look at the Mach task
APIs that are available,
right.
A whole bunch of them go away.
If you try to terminate a Mach task
that actually is part of a BSD process,
that'll just return you an error
because the BSD part of the system
doesn't have a chance to clean up and
do the management that it would do,
right.
And so we don't allow that to happen.
of similarly creating new ones.
We don't allow you to do that
or we prefer you not do that.
Everything else is risky.
You can go ahead and
create exception handlers.
You can go ahead and get info on the
process itself or the task itself or get
a list of threads or control threads,
create threads, but you shouldn't do
anything else with the task.
But again, a lot of you will not be
programming BSD processes.
You're actually going to be programming
applications out at the higher level.
Either Carbon, Cocoa, Java, whatever.
And they add additional set
of resources and additional
set of APIs for managing them.
Actually many sets of
APIs for managing them.
One of the things that happens
when you create those higher level
applications is they all talk to a
common process management service
that's a part of the core service.
Core services in the system.
And it does all of the
management for you.
And so you tend,
that's how you get things that pop up in,
actually.
When you're looking at the tools
that are available at that level,
you have the dock and you have
force quit and all those things.
CPS, the core process service,
is the thing that lets you
manage processes and the larger
applications all register with that.
Process viewer will actually
let you view and introspect just
any BSD process in the system.
The same with top and PS.
And if you really want to see what's
going on down at the lower levels,
you can use Zprint,
which is a tool that talks to the
kernel's zone management system.
And will basically print out
statistics on how many of every kind
of resource that the kernel has.
And in those lists is all
of the Mach services and the
Mach resources that are available.
So you'll see how many Mach tasks,
how many Mach threads are
being managed as well.
And so you can actually see and inspect
some of the Mach level resources.
With that tool.
So this is how you manage processes
and handle exceptions and all
of that is all at this level.
One of the things you have to be
very careful about is although
BSD processes have limits on the number
of open files and a lot of the other
resources that are available to you.
One of the things that's not implemented
in the kernel that shipped was 10.0.
Is any ability to limit the
resource allocations at the bottom.
And that's what we're going to
be looking at in the Mach level.
So any thread can go ahead
and allocate these resources.
Right.
And we don't have any limits on
the amount of those resources
you can go ahead and allocate.
And so if you have a runaway process.
Right.
That's just leaking a port or
leaking some kernel resource over
and over and over and over again.
Right.
Over time, the application may die.
That's certainly one outcome
that might come from this.
But another outcome from
that particular problem.
Is that.
It may actually just lock up the system
and eventually panic the system because
you've ran out of kernel resources.
In order to provide that.
So what you have to do is even though
you are writing a Carbon application
or a Cocoa application.
You need to take some of these tools.
Top and PS.
In this case, top.
If you were looking for leaks.
Right.
And just watch your application running.
And if you happen to see
something leaking away.
You need to address that.
Within a process,
you obviously have threads.
At the lowest level,
you have a Mach thread.
Mach does all the
scheduling in the system.
Mach threads are the primary
threading resource in the system.
One really interesting thing about
Mach threads that confuses a lot of
people is that they actually have
no resources other than scheduling
attributes and a register state.
That's it.
That is what a Mach thread is.
Everything else you think about a thread,
stacks and per-thread
data and things like that,
Mach doesn't know anything about those.
It's all expected to be wrapped
by some higher level service.
And again, at the Mach level,
and an interesting thing is
you can actually register for
exception handling and death
notification at the thread level.
And those kind of APIs still are
usable even when you look at it in the
context of a BSD thread or a P thread.
BOSX threads are the thing
that provides the resources at
the user level for a thread.
They provide the stack for a thread.
They provide the thread-specific
data implementation.
Those are the APIs you can use
to create them and manage them.
But again, you may or may not just be
stopping at a BSD process.
You may be writing a
Carbon or a Cocoa application.
And in those cases,
you tend to not write to Pthreads.
You're going to write to create
an NS thread inside of Cocoa or
you're going to create an
NP task in a Carbon application.
Well, those are BSD.
They are Pthreads.
Each and every one of those is a Pthread.
And so you can have the breadth
of services available to you
from each of those layers.
Again, at the thread level,
if you tried to destroy a Mach thread
right out from underneath of a Pthread,
you can do it.
Your application is free to do that.
It can do that to its own threads.
You're going to leave the Pthread
code implementation in a lurch.
So you better not do that.
But you could.
One nice thing about Pthreads,
the way the higher level
application services,
threading services,
wrap around the Pthread level,
is that almost everything you can
do to a Pthread you can do on those
higher level services and they
tend to work well with each other.
Right, and so, well,
how do I view threads in my system?
How do I tune for it?
How do I take care of the
threading in my system?
And here's some tools you can do it.
ThreadViewer, if anyone was at the
performance tools meeting,
session yesterday,
you saw them going and actually showing
ThreadViewer as an application that
they were debugging during that process.
Well, at the end of that meeting,
the end of that session,
they decided that they were going
to release that ThreadViewer
to people as soon as possible.
So that's going to be a really
nice application for viewing
threads in the system in a
graphical way at a higher level.
Because up until that point, well,
you could sample threads
with the sample app,
but that's kind of not something
you would do ongoing and just
watch your application go.
It's typically you've noticed a problem,
right, and you would fire up Sampler and
go off and do what you needed to do,
right?
And TopMPS,
I know I've had Top running on
the side of my system forever,
right?
But it's a lot.
It's like drinking from a fire hose.
That's a lot of information.
It doesn't give you a graphical bang.
There's something going on there
that I really need to worry about.
some of the tips.
Well, in Mac OS X,
we promote people to lazy init as
much as possible in their system,
right?
If you have a framework or
anything else in your system,
you really want to delay initializing it.
One of the problems with the big bounces,
the bounce marks when you're
launching an application in X,
is that a lot of the code brought
over from IX basically had this model,
initialize everything once up front,
right, as much as you can,
and then we'll use it later, right,
almost for free.
Well, in X,
what you're doing is initializing
it all up front once each time
each application launches,
right?
And so one of the services you
can use to get around that problem
is this pthreadonce facility,
which basically,
at the front of each major
access point into your service,
right, you can put a pthreadonce,
call the initialization
routine at the front of that,
right?
And the pthreads code will guarantee
that the very first time you call one
of your functions that has this in it,
it'll go call the initialization routine,
but it won't ever allow it to
be called again from that code.
So that way you can delay
your initialization until the
very first time you're called.
Also, a lot of people like to create
their own debuggers or their
own debugging environment.
They tend to want to get the exceptions
from an application as it's running,
filter them through their
own set of interfaces,
and decide whether or not to let the
system see the rest of them later.
You can catch exceptions at
any one of three places in Mac.
You can catch exceptions
at the thread level,
at the task level,
and you can actually catch
them at the widest level,
the host level.
BSD tends to hook itself
at the host level.
When a process or a thread runs along
and executes an invalid instruction,
it's going to send an
exception down this chain.
It's going to first send
the exception message.
It's going to send it out
to the thread level handler.
If the thread level
handler says he handled it,
then fine.
We'll just let the thread continue
and we'll go on from there.
If he didn't, then we're going to send
it on to the next level,
to the process level, the task level.
There's another handler sitting there.
If there is one,
then we'll send it to him.
Then same thing down below.
Well, BSD tends to be at the task level.
You're going to see debuggers like
GDB and things like that are going
to be sitting at the task level.
BSD is at the host.
GDB is at the task.
If you want to be able to
intercept and get in there
and do something on your own,
then you would tend to do
it at the thread level.
So now that we have threads,
we obviously have to schedule them.
And how do we schedule them?
Well, this has been somewhat of a
mystery inside of Mac OS X.
There's obviously something
going on with this banding.
You can see different threads being
assigned different priorities,
but we've been messing with this,
tuning it,
and so we've been kind of adverse to
putting out exactly what the banding
is that we have in the system.
But now that you're trying
to write real applications,
you're going to need to know.
Some of you are writing
multimedia applications,
and you really need to know how to
get to be a fixed priority process,
how to set your priority.
Well, these are actually the
bands that we have.
At the very highest,
so we have a range from 0 to 127.
The very highest level are what
we call time-constrained threads.
And so any thread that's registered
as a time-constrained thread,
and you don't have to be privileged.
You don't have to be privileged to say
you want a time-constrained thread.
They will run up in that
highest band somewhere,
and that we won't tell you.
But it's based on the time
constraints that you provide,
and then we marry that with
a bunch of other information
and decide what priority you
actually get within that band.
But they tend to run at a
fixed priority in that band.
So they'll just run, run, run, run, run,
run, run if they have things to do.
And since they're a much higher
band than most other applications,
obviously we're going
to schedule those first.
We're also going to
preemptively schedule those.
And so even if something else lowers,
running along in the kernel,
doing a kernel service,
if one of these comes along,
we're going to schedule it.
Well, that leads into a concern,
obviously,
is that if any application can do this,
and can set one of these
threads up really high,
then obviously any application
can kill the system,
and there's no way you'd get it back if
it just runs up there forever and ever.
Well, we actually have limits to what can
happen in a time-constrained thread.
And so if you're running for too
long in a time-constrained thread,
then you get bumped back into the
normal application band for a while,
and then if you settle down,
then we'll put you back into
the time-constrained band.
If you don't ever settle down,
then you just stay down there
in the normal application band.
And actually when you're in
the application in the time
constraint band you're actually
scheduled above the kernel threads.
Above I.O.
threads.
So your stuff will happen before
we'll handle disk activity.
It will be the first thing
the kernel will go and run.
And then below the kernel and
I/O is the core services threads,
things like the GUI managers.
So if you're running a time-constrained
thread and it's just chewing away,
guess what?
You might even have trouble
moving that mouse around.
You might have trouble selecting that
application to kill it if it runs away.
That's why if it's run away,
it will get bumped down so that the
core service threads have a chance
to run and go ahead and get you.
For the rest of the threads,
they tend to be grouped
into two categories.
It's GUI-based threads and regular
kind of background activity,
regular BSD process kind of threads.
And the GUI ones tend to be
a little bit higher in the
bands than the default ones.
But all of these threads
are priority adjusted.
So as they run and take time,
they tend to start at their base
and work their way down as they go.
They consume CPU under contention.
So if they're consuming CPU and
nobody else is contending for the CPU,
they're fine.
They'll just stay, stay, stay, stay,
stay.
As soon as they start contending
for the CPU with other threads
and other things want to run,
they get nicked a little bit each
time this happens until those
other threads get a chance to run.
And then as a few quantums
expire and they've been nicked,
then they drift back up and drift down.
So every thread tends to
balance itself in this group.
And that's the standard.
policy in the system is
to timeshare and adjust.
One of the things you can
do in that category is
assign precedence to your threads.
So if I have two priority,
two normal application threads,
but I always want this one
to have precedence over this
one within my application,
then you can use the precedence policy
setting to give an ordering to those.
And like I said, we have,
we can take those threads and
schedule them fully preemptively,
both kernel and user.
So we have a fully preemptive kernel.
If you're a time-constrained thread,
you will interrupt things right
out of the kernel and we'll
switch to you immediately.
And we can obviously balance
those across multiple CPUs.
When you're at the BSD process level,
well, you have a few more things
that come out for you.
You have the ability to set nice
and if you've noticed in Mac OS X,
that actually doesn't do anything.
But the later versions,
soon you will see a version
that has that fixed.
At the Pthread level,
you can set your own
scheduling attributes.
Those will feed into the
precedence and into the timeshare
and standard policy constraints.
and Alan at the higher level, right,
you have management going on even
beyond what the Mach level manages.
So if you're writing cooperative
threads or you have deferred threads
inside of your Carbon application,
Carbon is actually getting
involved there and trying to make
sure that those things run even
though they're each a Mach thread.
He's trying to make sure
they run in the right order.
Again, some of the standard
tools to look at things.
But the big tip here is don't use the
old APIs for setting things as round
robin or timeshare that are still
available in the Mach kernel you have.
Use the new get policy,
set policy APIs that take the
precedence and the time constraint.
So now that we've got
scheduling enabled to run,
let's see what we can do with
anything outside of ourselves.
And for that we need to
access files typically.
Inside of the file management
system of the whole kernel,
Mach task actually has
no concept of file.
So you would think that Mach is really
not involved in this discussion,
but that's not true.
Every file in the system really
is managed and controlled.
The cache for the data of that
application is managed and controlled.
By Mach through what's called VM objects.
So Mach manages the cache in the system,
the VM page cache,
and all of our file system activity.
goes through the VM page cache
to do what it needs to do.
So as you're reading from files,
reading files off a desk,
those files are stored
in the regular VM cache.
We don't have a file system cache
and a VM cache for things that are,
you know, applications that are
mapped into your program.
We have one cache.
Read, read, read, read, read.
It all goes into one pile and it
pushes things off the end of the pile.
[Transcript missing]
Some really good tools to tune
your use of files is FS Usage.
It's a tool that will basically,
as you're accessing a file,
it will spew out what's going on,
every access, every read, write, open,
close, either by a particular application
or by any application overall.
And so you can get basically
a real-time view of everything
that's going on file activity-wise.
Also, there's another tool, LSOF.
It's another command line tool.
Both of these are command line.
And it will basically list
every open file in the system.
And who has it open,
what file descriptor number
it is within that process.
It's a very useful tool.
Big tip, because we have this one cache
that handles all mapped files,
all your libraries, all your frameworks,
all your executables,
it's also the cache where you
handle all the reading of files,
reading and writing of files.
If you happen to be reading
something once and only once,
spewing in a big image file
or something like that that
you're going to process once,
you don't need that file
in the cache anymore.
You've got it in your application.
Having a copy of it in your
application and having the original
one in the cache just means we are
taking up double the space in VM,
at least temporarily, for that data.
Whenever you can,
use the no cache options.
At the Carbon level,
you have no cache reads and writes.
At the BSD level,
we actually have an F control
that you can specify to say
these are no cache operations.
You really need to use
the no cache operations.
Otherwise,
as you run through memory with big files,
you can push really important
pieces of the system,
like the system framework
and everything that you use,
and your own code, right out of memory.
Thank you.
One thing that also gets people
every once in a while is that while
you typically were able to open in a
Carbon application as many files as you
wanted until you hit the system limit,
in BSD there's a soft limit
for the number of open per
process and that's 256.
And so as you open FSRefs
inside of Carbon applications,
you may end up running into this limit.
Typically it's a bug.
Typically it's because you're forgetting
to close them and you just open,
open, open, open, open,
and eventually you'll hit the 256 limit.
We basically, you have that limit now.
You can change it with an assist control,
or sorry, a
Yeah, there's an API at the BSD level
to basically up the limit for you,
right?
The same thing can happen
at a system-wide level.
We have a system-wide level of
number of V nodes which are the
open file descriptors up there,
the open file handles, right?
And those are, you know,
there's a system-wide limit determined
at boot time based on the amount of
memory in the system and essentially,
you know, some other tunable parameters.
Well, you can tune those up as
well with assist control.
Now we have files and we
talked a little bit about VM.
But we need to talk about the
rest of what happens with VM.
The Mach VM pretty much controls the
virtual memory in all of Mac OS X.
BSD provides some wrapper services to
that but it's mostly managed by Mach.
Right.
Mach provides the protected
address spaces that Mac OS X,
you know, is promoted.
Here we have protected address spaces.
Right.
One nice thing about the way
Mach does it is you have basically
extreme flexibility in how you
want to assemble an address space.
Right.
You can put stuff here, there,
everywhere.
It's really wonderful when you're
trying to emulate an old system.
Well, guess what?
That's exactly what we're trying to do.
It's one of the key
benefits of using Mach VM.
Is that you can put,
if stuff had to be up there,
you can put it up there.
there.
It also provides controlled sharing
of resources so you can map things
in exclusively into one application.
You can map them in,
copy on right into one but read right
into the other so you can write into
your piece of memory and the other
guy can see it but can't modify it.
Or you can map things in,
read right into both.
So it's a really flexible way
of putting systems together.
What does it look like?
In the picture before,
we showed a VM object and we showed
cache pages sitting off of it.
We showed this thing called a VNode.
The VNode from the Mach view of things
is just an abstract memory manager.
It doesn't understand what that is.
It just has a protocol to talk to it.
Anybody can be one of
those and provide services.
As long as you do,
we'll do the right thing.
Here you have two address spaces.
Each one of which has some
portion of an object mapped in.
In this case,
they have the same object mapped in,
the same part of the same object,
but they have it mapped at
two different addresses.
One's up at zero and the other
one's somewhere down inside.
You're running along and all of a
sudden one of the guys takes a fault
because the page isn't existing.
So we send a message, basically,
not send a message,
but the address space queries the
virtual memory object and says,
do I have this page cached?
Well, guess what?
No, I don't have this page cached,
so let me put a placeholder in
case somebody else comes along
and tries to do the same thing.
I won't do this again,
which is sending a request
to the memory object,
and the memory object
sends back a data page,
and then we make that data page
available in the application.
So now all of a sudden,
you can go on and run.
But look what happened.
Over in the other address space,
the guy with the same area mapped in,
but in a different part
of his address space,
well, we have the page cached now.
He doesn't have the
page available to him.
250 objects that these
guys share in common,
each one would have to have
250 entries pointing at,
you know, each of the individual objects.
Well,
if you're absolutely sure that you're
going to have a whole bunch of them,
objects that are in common
between two applications,
you can set up what's
called a shared region,
which basically is a
recursive address space.
You can have an address space entry
that points at another address
space for any portion of it.
Right?
And we tend to use this in our system,
and I'll show you what for in a second.
Right?
But we have two of them
that we put into place,
one that tends to be sitting at
7 bazillion and the other one
that's sitting at 8 bazillion.
Right?
One is directly mapped shared
by each of the applications,
and another is mapped copy on
write by each of the applications.
And so let's get rid of that copy
on write one because it's a little
confusing right for the moment.
Right?
And what's backing that
shared address space?
Well, the same stuff that was backing
the other address space.
Right?
A reference to a memory object,
which has some cached
pages associated with it,
and a reference off to some manager
that knows how to fill in the data
that it doesn't already have cached.
So now you come along and you
take a fault on that address.
Right?
It queries the shared address space,
and the shared address space then
doesn't have the page either,
so it basically queries
the object itself.
And we go, "Nope, we don't have it,
so let's put a placeholder
in place." And we put the
placeholder in the shared region.
Well, guess what?
Because it's truly
shared by the other guys,
the placeholder actually shows
up in everybody at the same time.
Right,
we sent the request onto the pager,
and when he sends the data back, wham,
the data shows up in every
address space at the same time.
What do we use that for?
Well, if you take a dump of a
typical Mac OS application,
this is the layout you're going to see.
Down at zero,
we tend to have a guard page
that will catch zero faults,
zero references,
and raise an exception for you.
If you don't like that idea,
you can go ahead and
put another page there.
It's fine.
Just replace that.
But that's the typical behavior.
Starting on the first page on
up to the first gigabyte is
typically your application where
the application itself is mapped,
where the heaps and stuff tend to come.
But heaps can be there and you can
fill up basically any of the space,
any of the holes in here
with memory that you like.
So if you have a heap manager
like ours that basically says,
get me hunks,
and then I'll subdivide them.
Right.
Once you run out of space between
the application and one gig,
if you have more than that,
in heaps it'll go and find spots.
Basically the first fit for
another chunk going on up the line.
But if you notice it's seven and
eight bazillion respectively.
There's a read-only section
and a copy-on-write section.
Well this is where all the frameworks
tend to fall that your applications use.
So we have 70 some odd frameworks
that are a standard part of Mac OS X.
If we had to map those into each
application separately and manage them
separately and relocate them separately,
we would do a lot of extra overhead
as each application launched.
So what we do instead is have a
shared region that points off at all
the shared text of an application.
We relocate it once if
it has to be relocated,
but typically it doesn't because
a lot of our system is pre-bound,
our libraries, and they sit and point
off in that one area.
And then we map the data part of that,
add another 256 meg off of that and
copy-on-write into each application.
So as each one takes a,
writes particular parts of the data,
they get their own copy.
By doing this at 256 meg offsets,
we actually get to take advantage of
something that happens in the PowerPC,
which is that you can actually truly
share TLB entries and everything like
that on a 256 meg boundary with people.
So at the 7 bazillion where
all the frameworks are,
we're actually sharing TLB entries and
everything between every application.
Unless that application goes
in and replaces a library or
overloads a library or says,
use a different library for me,
then we have to relocate the other
parts of that collection of libraries,
at which point you get your own
private copy and it behaves like a
traditional old-fashioned application.
So how do you go ahead and
debug the VM services you have?
Well, one of the best tools you've
got available to you if you are
watching at the tool session
yesterday is malloc-debug.
It's a wonderful thing to see
individual parts of your heap being
leaked away and whether or not
you're actually using them anymore
and whether they could be reclaimed.
But that doesn't catch memory allocations
that happen outside of the heap manager.
And there's lots of reasons why
memory would be allocated outside
the heap manager and directly
fill up your address space.
And there's this tool called
VM Map which will actually just
give you a dump of all the,
it's a command line tool, sorry,
that will give you a dump of
all the mappings in your system,
in your application,
and you can find the ones that
you don't seem to realize,
you don't remember having, right,
and start investigating those.
And what you'll tend to find is
that something sent you a piece of
memory and you just forgot about it,
right?
Something in the system sent
it to you out of line in a
message or some other way.
Or you allocated a hunk
directly with VM allocate,
right, instead of using the malloc tools,
and you just let it dangle, all right?
and that will show you those.
You can also see those in top.
The place you go first is top.
You watch your application running.
If you see the number of memory entries
going up and up and up and up and up,
you're probably forgetting to
deallocate something that you
really needed to deallocate.
One of the things that happens is
when you do one of those VM allocates,
they tend to start at zero
and find the first fit.
When you're looking through
your address map and you see
a bunch of entries up by zero,
these are probably pieces of memory
that were allocated with VM allocate
and you might want to look at those.
Another really important tip goes
along with the no cache option is
if you map things into your address
space or you malloc a big hunk of
memory or you allocate it and you
use it and now you're done with it.
But you really don't want to keep
allocating it and deallocating
it because maybe it's expensive.
You want to kill it.
Kill it out of the cache.
There's a couple of ways you can do that.
There's an msync option at the
POSIX level that lets you kill pages.
There's another one at the
Mach level called vmmsync.
They're really usable interchangeably.
It depends on what API set you want.
want to stick to.
But you'd need to kill them.
Okay.
So we talked about all these things.
We've got, you know,
tasks and threads and address
spaces and they're all protected,
but when you have a protected address
space in a protected environment,
you need to communicate somehow.
And so that brings us
to the IPC services.
And again, Mach plays a big part in the
IPC services of Mac OS X.
Not so much in what
happens at the BSD level,
so in a BSD process it
might not be that important.
But in Mac OS X in general,
it actually becomes very important.
So, an address, sorry,
the basic idea of IPC service
in Mac OS X is Mach IPC.
Mach IPC manages rights in port
namespaces associated with each task.
You have rights to ports.
It's kind of like an open
file descriptor inside of BSD,
but instead it's a
communications channel,
a small one, called a Mach port.
So,
here I have a Mach port in this second
task that gives me the right to send a
message to the front end of the Mac OS X.
What's really nice about Mac OS X,
or about Mach IPC,
is that if you have memory and
you have other port rights,
you can collect those together and send
them in messages over to the other task.
And so you can do really
flexible communication.
So I've got a piece of memory
in my address space in task two,
and I've got another
port right in task two,
one that I own the receive right for.
And what I do is I build a little
message that basically contains,
you know, some general description
of what I'm sending.
But I don't have to send it to
the front end of the Mac OS X.
But it also contains a reference
to each of these things.
And I send it over to
the port that I have,
and when it's received over in task one,
guess what?
Now he has new virtual memory,
and he has new port rights.
He can use the port right I just
gave him to send a message back to
me saying I'm done what I'm doing.
All the RPC and the interaction that
goes on inside of Mac OS X or a large
portion of it happens via this mechanism.
When you want to open a
window in a GUI application,
well,
the frameworks inside of your application
talk to the core graphics server,
the Windows server, by sending a message,
a Mach message over there
saying we need to do something.
And what they do is they arrange
to have a piece of shared memory in
common to do most of the communication,
but then they are constantly sending
messages back and forth to each other
about what the state of that is.
So again,
you have this inside of each task.
You have a collection of these ports,
right?
And they can represent, you know,
just a basic message queue.
There's also variants
that are like semaphores,
lock sets, right?
They're handles to things
that the kernel implements.
And they can be collected in sets.
And that collection in
sets is really important.
Because if you look
inside of an application,
a GUI application in Mac OS X,
you're going to see at least
one of these CF run loop things,
right,
which is the basic primitive of the
event mechanism inside of Mac OS X.
And a CF run loop is actually just
a wrapper around a Mach port set,
right, or a collection of Mach port sets.
So you may have many port sets and
the CF run loops own some of them
and put some port rights into them.
And each of those port rights represents
something that can drive events.
a source of events that your
application may need to deal with.
So he's already got a
bunch in this port set,
but as time goes on,
he adds more and more and more.
And what you realize is while
you're talking to a lot of things
inside of Mac OS X via ports,
every once in a while you're talking
to a traditional BSD application
or you're talking to a traditional,
you know, who knows, right?
There's lots of other ways you
can communicate with things,
but you need to somehow, you know,
most applications feed that back into the
run loop so that your application can see
the events driven by these other sources.
While you can't be
sitting at a single wait,
right, when you do a CF run loop wait,
right, it sits on a port set
waiting for a message,
right?
If that isn't coming in via a port set,
that thread isn't going to see it.
Or through a port,
it's not going to see it.
So that thread can act,
that run loop can actually
create worker threads for the
kinds of IPC that he doesn't,
that isn't port-based receives the,
in this case, off of a socket,
receives the message off a socket
or the data off a socket and
tickles another port inside the
port set to wake the run loop up.
Some of those other sources
that you can get things on.
At the BSD level you have sockets
and POSIX semaphores and you
have Pthread synchronizers.
Right now the Pthread
synchronizers are intratask only,
but as time goes on they'll
become intertask as POSIX says
they're allowed to be.
And then they're going to have
to feed into this mechanism as
well if you want to be able to
receive them in a single place.
And then what happens at the outer
level again is you have a port set
that's wrapped by a run loop that
becomes the foundation of your event
queue inside of your application.
And so as you're watching
your applications,
your main thread is going to
be calling wait next event.
Hopefully not.
Hopefully it's using Carbon events.
But if it is calling wait next event,
that's going to be
calling CF run loop run.
We'll see if run loop actually built
up one of these port sets of all the
things that can drive events into it.
And then that's calling
Mach message trap,
typically Mach message override trap,
doing a receive waiting
for stuff to come in.
So you're going to see that over
and over and over and over again
in each of your applications.
Again, when you're looking in Sampler,
you're going to see that kind of thing.
You're also going to see it in SC usage.
If you run SC usage at the bottom,
it tends to list all the
threads and what they're doing,
what they're currently waiting on.
And you're going to see
Mach message over write trap,
Mach message over write trap.
They're all coming in on run loops
of some sort or another or directly
receiving on a Mach message.
Ports represent almost
everything in Mac or in Mac OS X,
a large portion of things.
So again, if you have a window open,
the handle for the window is a port.
So when you look at the CG debug stuff,
it has a list down the side of
the ports that it has open to
represent each one of those windows.
And if you're tempted
to use the IPC directly,
the Mach IPC, we prefer you not.
There's a tool called MIG.
It's Mach interface generator.
And it's basically an IDL compiler
that wraps around Mach messaging
and you can specify routines that go
both directions or one-way messages
and it generates wrapper routines
that generate those messages for you
and receive those messages for you
so you don't have to understand and
manipulate the low-level messaging.
It's just a nice convenience.
Okay, so now we have the ability to
communicate but we're supposed
to have a secure system here.
How do we do that?
Well, again,
a lot comes back to those ports.
Ports are restricted.
You can't just invent a port
name inside of Mac and say I want
to send a message to that port.
Somebody has to give you that port,
a send write to that
port in the first place.
Some of them are registered
globally where you can just
look them up and get them.
So you can send some common service
a message saying I want to do
something and it'll respond to that.
But in a lot of ways, a lot of cases,
they aren't registered globally.
So maybe you'll talk to a service through
a global port and it will send you back
a port that only you can talk to it
to directly manipulate your Windows.
That's why inside of the
Windows server communication,
you get a new port per window because
it only wants you and only you to
be able to manipulate that window.
And the port write mechanism
allows that to happen without
him doing anything on his side.
I received a message on that port.
It must be him or somebody he
delegated to send this message.
I'll do it.
So they're pre-authorized.
And in fact, Mach part of Mac OS X has no
authorization facility at all.
It basically says if you've got that
port and you send a message on it,
we'll do what that message says to do.
Those ports represent things
inside of the kernel as well.
If you have a task or a thread or
any of those other kernel resources,
they're represented by unique ports.
You get a hold of one of those ports,
a thread port, you send a message to
it saying terminate.
Guess what?
It'll terminate.
You've got to be careful
about sending your ports out,
but it's also a really nice
mechanism to say we're not going
to just say that APIs are available
and usable by the application
themselves like threading APIs.
If that application wants to send
its thread port over to a friend,
that friend can issue all the threading
APIs itself directly on that port and
will treat it at the kernel level just
like the application had done it itself.
The same thing with
managing the port space.
The port space is
represented by the task.
Getting things in and out of your own
port space is done with that same thing.
The only nod to authorization that the
mock-level services provide is that each
message that's sent is sent with a tag,
some kind of security tag
on it that basically says,
I don't know what this is,
but somebody said five was associated
with the guy who sent this message,
so I'm going to send five along.
Well, what happens?
What happens is the BSD layer is
the guy who says what five means.
He provides the identification
and authorization in the system.
Identification is UIDs
inside the BSD world.
user IDs.
You have user IDs and effective
user IDs and you have group IDs and
effective group IDs and you have,
you know, correct collection of groups
that you're allowed to be in.
Right, and whatever BSD says,
this task has as a security
token is what gets sent along.
Well, BSD is also the guy who maintains
permissions at the file level,
makes sense because he's the guy who
implements the file systems at his level.
All the authorization to gain access
to files is done by the BSD layer.
He does somewhat similar
to what Mac does.
Once he has given access to
something through the file system,
he has a file descriptor which
is basically the access point,
the restricted access point,
and permissions are associated
with that file descriptor.
It's pre-cached authorizations.
But BSD semantics and
Mach semantics alone aren't
enough for Mac OS X in general.
You have applications that
want to run as a general user,
a regular old user that need
to do privileged things.
Sometimes we have a privileged
server that's just sitting over there
waiting to do that thing for you.
And other times we have a server
that is privileged to do specific
things and will authorize you each
time to do that one particular thing
through the new authorization API that
happens as a core service API.
Also at that level you have keychains
and keychain management and all
that stuff is done up above the
basic primitives of the BSD file and
UID stuff and the Mach port stuff.
Again, FS usage is nice because
it shows you what kind of
access you're doing to a file.
LSOF will tell you what kind
of accesses you have to a file.
VM map will tell you what kind of
permissions you have on certain memory.
So if you have read, write, or read,
write, copy on write so that when you
actually touch the thing you get a
unique copy instead of being able
to write to the actual main store.
So you can get a feel for what's
going on in the system that way.
One thing to do is take a nod from
the Mach part and the BSD part
which is to cache authorizations.
If you have to do some of your own work,
well yes you could set up a server
that receives messages and just
constantly looks at the security token
on the bottom of a message and says
well am I allowed to take this from
this guy because he says he's five.
Do I allow five to do
this or do I say no?
That's kind of awkward to keep in mind.
You keep doing that over
and over and over again.
You would prefer to establish a unique
connection with each of your clients
in that situation and receive only and
pass out the send write on the other
side only to that one guy and then every
time a message comes in on that you
allow him to go ahead and access it.
Alright, so those were the basic
services inside the kernel.
Where can you get more information
about how this stuff all really
works because this was far too much
and far too quick to get too much of
anything totally useful out of it?
Well, there's a good resource
right on the developer CD and
if you've installed that,
now it's right on the disk of
your system and most people
don't even realize it's there.
Under the developer section
there's a documentation section.
Under that there's a kernel section.
And there's descriptions,
there's a basic description
of the kernel services again,
some more details about
how they're managed,
what the APIs are.
And especially on this particular part,
there's a reference to something
called the OSF documentation.
Well,
our Mach kernel is the OSF Mach kernel
and so if you click through that link,
you're going to go ahead and
find the documentation for the
Mach APIs that we have in our system.
They're not 100% accurate.
They're quite a few years old.
And we've made some changes internally,
but they're pretty good and it
gives you a really good idea of how
the Mach part of the system works.
There's obviously the
Darwin open source pages.
You can go to those.
And the Mac OS X homepage.
And our tech writers have
renamed the book on me.
It's the design and implementation of
the 4.4 BSD operating system by McKusick.
It's great for the BSD side of things.
All right.
Where can you learn more here today?
Sorry.
But for those of people who are
watching via the DVD later on,
you can go look up these sessions.
The performance tool
session was really good.
It shows you how to see the effects
of all of these interactions inside
of an application that you're writing.
The same thing with the debugging stuff.
So when you get your CD later,
go look at the debugging
and the performance stuff.
They're really important.
You just saw the leveraging the
BSD more than likely if you were here.
And in a few minutes
you'll get to do feedback.